gh-127989: C API: Refer to attached thread states instead of the GIL (#127990)
python/cpython: Doc/glossary.rst

Reviewer: A few points to consider, which are reflected in my other comments:

* current does not imply attached, but attached does implies current
* the glossary probably isn't the best place for C-API details
* "runtime context" or "execution context" might be a clearer term for users than "thread state"

The only tricky part is that we already talk about "contexts" relative to asyncio.

Author: I'll commit the suggestions tomorrow when I'm available to do a full find-and-replace so I don't blow up CI in the meantime.

For the per-thread thread state pointer (what a mouthful!), I'm happy with something like "runtime context," because there was no prior term for it, but I think we do want to keep the term "thread state." Thread states are documented, and users like to read the source code to understand some C functions--seeing `_PyThreadState_GET` and "thread state" in the documentation makes things more clear. That, and "context" doesn't convey the fact that it's a thread-local too well, which is important.

> the glossary probably isn't the best place for C-API details

Hmm, we do have "borrowed reference" and "strong reference" in there; where else should "thread state" point to?

Reviewer 2: > "runtime context" or "execution context" might be a clearer term for users than "thread state"

I like "thread state" :-)

Reviewer 3: +1 for sticking with thread state.

Between contextvars and context managers, and just the general idea of "context of execution", "context" is seriously overloaded already.

"thread state" isn't completely unambiguous (it could theoretically take on the holistic meaning of "all state associated with the current thread, including the execution stack and all thread local variables"), but the context(!) of use should help avoid that misinterpretation.

Reviewer 3: "Runtime context" in particular is problematic, since the execution model is set up with the hierarchy of:

* there is one runtime, which may be serially finalized and reinitialized, but you can never have more than one at a time
* the runtime will host at least one interpreter, but may host more
* each interpreter will have at least one thread state, but may have more
* for an OS thread to execute Python code, it must be associated with a Python thread state (which also indirectly determines which interpreter it is associated with)

      iterator's :meth:`~object.__anext__` method until it raises a
      :exc:`StopAsyncIteration` exception.  Introduced by :pep:`492`.

   attached thread state

      A :term:`thread state` that is stored in the :term:`current thread state`.
      If no thread state is attached, then the :term:`current thread state` is ``NULL``.

>       Attempting to call Python's C API without an attached thread state will result in a fatal error.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      Attempting to call Python's C API without an attached thread state will result
      in a fatal error or an undefined behavior.
```

      iterator's :meth:`~object.__anext__` method until it raises a
      :exc:`StopAsyncIteration` exception.  Introduced by :pep:`492`.

>    attached thread state
> 
>       A :term:`thread state` that is stored in the :term:`current thread state`.
>       If no thread state is attached, then the :term:`current thread state` is ``NULL``.
>       Attempting to call Python's C API without an attached thread state will result
>       in a fatal error or an undefined behavior.
> 
>       A thread state can be attached and detached explicitly by the user, or
>       implicitly by the interpreter in between calls. For example, an attached
>       thread state is detached upon entering a :c:macro:`Py_BEGIN_ALLOW_THREADS`
>       block, and then re-attached when :c:macro:`Py_END_ALLOW_THREADS` is reached.
> 
>       On most builds of Python, having an attached thread state means that the
>       caller holds the :term:`GIL` for the current interpreter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   attached runtime context
      When the :term:`current runtime context` is attached, the OS thread has
      access to the full Python C API and can run Python code.
      
      Attempting to call the C API without an attached thread state will result
      in a fatal error or undefined behavior.  A context can be attached and detached
      explicitly by the user through the C API, or implicitly by the runtime, including
      during blocking C calls and by the bytecode interpreter in between calls.

      On most builds of Python, having an attached context means that the
      caller holds the :term:`GIL` for the current interpreter.
      
   attached thread state
      The :term:`thread state` corresponding to the :term:`attached runtime context`.
```

      tasks (see :mod:`asyncio`) associate each task with a context which
      becomes the current context whenever the task starts or resumes execution.

   current thread state

      A per-thread :c:data:`PyThreadState` pointer.

>       The pointer might be ``NULL``, in which case Python code should not

Reviewer 2: I would prefer "must not" or "cannot":

```suggestion
      The pointer might be ``NULL``, in which case Python code must not
```

      tasks (see :mod:`asyncio`) associate each task with a context which
      becomes the current context whenever the task starts or resumes execution.

>    current thread state
> 
>       A per-thread :c:data:`PyThreadState` pointer.
> 
>       The pointer might be ``NULL``, in which case Python code must not
>       get executed.
> 
>       If the current thread state is non-``NULL``, then the :term:`thread state`
>       that it points to is considered to be :term:`attached <attached thread state>`.
> 
>       The pointer for the calling thread can be acquired via :c:func:`PyThreadState_Get` or
>       :c:func:`PyThreadState_GetUnchecked`, if it might be ``NULL``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   current runtime context
      The :term:`runtime context` that is active in the current OS thread.
      Only one context may be active in a thread at a time.  If a thread
      does not have an active context then the Python runtime is not available
      in that thread.  That means the C API is not available there, with a few
      exceptions, and no Python code is running there.  Even if a context
      is current, it must be :term:`attached <attached runtime context>`
      before the thread has access to the full C API and can run Python code.

   current thread state
      The :term:`thread state` corresponding to the :term:`current runtime context`.
```

      See also :term:`binary file` for a file object able to read and write
      :term:`bytes-like objects <bytes-like object>`.

>    thread state
>       In Python's C API, a thread state is a structure that holds
>       information about the current thread, typically in the :term:`current thread state`
>       pointer. A thread state can be attached or detached. An :term:`attached thread state`
>       is required to call most of the C API, unless a function explicitly documents
>       otherwise.
> 
>       See :ref:`Thread State and the Global Interpreter Lock <threads>` for more
>       information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   runtime context
      (AKA execution context)
      The information used by the Python runtime to run in an OS thread.
      This includes the current exception, if any, and the state of the bytecode interpreter.
      In Python's C API, it is known as a :term:`thread state`.
      
      Each context is bound to a single OS thread, but each thread may have
      many contexts.  At most one of them may be active at once, known as the
      :term:`current runtime context`.  The current context may be attached
      or detached.  An :term:`attached runtime context` is required to call most
      of the C API, unless a function explicitly documents otherwise.  Python code
      only runs in an attached context.
      
      Each context belongs to a single interpreter, but each interpreter may have
      many contexts.  It may even have multiple contexts for the same OS thread.
      Contexts from multiple interpreters may be bound to the same thread,
      but only one can be active in that thread at any given moment.

      See :ref:`Thread State and the Global Interpreter Lock <threads>` for more
      information.
      
   thread state
      The concrete C API implementation of a :term:`runtime context`.
      See: :c:data:`PyThreadState`.
```
